>> Ifill: THE TALIBAN ANNOUNCED
IT WILL JOIN PEACE TALKS WITH
THE U.S. AND AFGHAN GOVERNMENTS.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT, WE
EXPLORE THE PROSPECTS FOR PEACE
IN AFGHANISTAN, AS ITS
GOVERNMENT FORCES DAY TOFORMALLY
TOOK CONTROL OF THE COUNTRY'S
SECURITY.
>> Ifill: THEN, THE DEBATE OVER
IMMIGRATION REFORM GATHERS
STEAM.
TONIGHT, RAY SUAREZ TALKS WITH
KENTUCKY RUBLIEPCAN SENATOR RAND
PAUL.
CITIZENSHIP IS A
PRIVILEGE I THI WENK CAN DISCUSS
HOW WE DO THAT DOWN THE ROAD.
WE EXAMINE A NEW STUDY THAT
>> Brown: WE EXAMINE A NEW STUDY
THAT FINDS MOST EDUCATION
SCHOOLS ARE IN DISARRAY, AND
POORLY PREPARING THE NATION'S
TEACHERS TO HELP STUDENTS LEARN.
>> Ifill: SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
KIRA KAY REPORTS FROM MYANMAR,
ON THE VIOLENT CLASHES BETWEEN
MUSLIMS AND BUDDHISTS THAT HAVE
DISPLACED MORE THAN 100,000
PEOPLE.
>> Brown: AND WE CLOSE WITH A
DIFFERENT LOOK AT AFGHANISTAN,
THROUGH AN ANCIENT ORAL
TRADITION KEPT ALIVE IN TWO-LINE
POEMS.
TELETRADE.
THE WOMEN HAVE DONE THIS FOR
CENTURIES, THEY REFLECT THAT ARE
>> Ifill: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: IT COULD BE A
BREAKTHROUGH MOMENT IN THE
LONGEST CONFLICT IN AMERICAN
HISTORY.
U.S. AND AFGHAN PEACE
NEGOTIATORS ARE GOING TO SIT
DOWN WITH THE MILITANTS WHO'VE
BEEN BATTLING AMERICAN TROOPS
SINCE 2001.
AFTER 12 YEARS OF WAR, SENIOR
U.S. OFFICIALS NOW SAY DIRECT
TALKS WITH THE TALIBAN ARE
SCHEDULED TO BEGIN WITHIN THE
NEXT FEW DAYS.
THE NEWS CAME AS PRESIDENT OBAMA
WOUND UP A MEETING WITH FRENCH
WITH THE AT THE G8 SUMMIT IN
NORTHERN IRELAND.
THE PRESIDENT SAID THAT THE
TALIBAN MUST COME PREPARED TO
MAKE CONCESSIONS.
>>  INCLUDING THE TALIBAN IS
GOING TO NEED TO ACCEPT AN
AFGHAN CONSTITUTION THAT
PRONOUNCES AGAINST VIOLENCE IS
COMMITTED TO PROTECTION OF WOMEN
AND MINORITIES.
>>  THE TALIBAN GAVE NO
INDICATION WHETHER IT WOULD
ACCEPT THOSE TERMS WHEN THE
MEETINGS BEGIN IN DOHA, QATAR.
INSTEAD THE MILITANTS LAID OUT
SEPARATE GOALS IN A NEWS DRONES
CARRIED ON AL JAZEERA.
>>  WHICH INCLUDE END OF
OCCUPATION OF AFGHANISTAN AND
ESTABLISHMENT OF SYSTEM WITH
SECURITY WITH THE MOST.
>>  U.S. OFFICIALS SAID AFGHAN
GOVERNMENT WOULD HOLD ITS OWN
TALKS WITH THE TALIBAN
SEPARATELY.
IN KABUL, AFGHAN PRESIDENT
KARZAI ANNOUNCED HIS NEGOTIATING
TEAM IS READY TO GO.
>>  OUR COUNCIL TRAVEL TO QATAR
TO DISCUSS PEACE TALKS WE HOPE
THAT OUR BROTHERS ALSO
UNDERSTAND THAT THE TALKS OF THE
PEACE PROGRESS WILL MOVE TO
THEIR OWN SOIL IN AFGHANISTAN
SOON TO ENSURE THE PEACE IN
AFGHANISTAN.
>>  TODAY'S ANNOUNCEMENT CAME AS
INTERNATIONAL FORCES FORMALLY
HANDLED OVER BOTH SECURITY
PATROLS TO THE AFGHAN MILITARY
AND POLICE.
IT WAS A MAJOR MILESTONE ON THE
PASS TOWARD WITHDRAWING ALL
FOREIGN COMBAT FORCES BY THE END
OF 2014.
NATO SECRETARY GENERAL ATTENDED
THE CEREMONY AND ELSA FA SIGHTED
THAT THE COALITION IS NOT
WALKING AWAY. WE TRAIN, ADVISE,E
AFGHAN SECURITY FORCES SO
AFGHANISTAN WILL STAND ON ITS
OWN FEET AFTER 2014.
>>  ABOUT 66,000 U.S. TROOPS
REMAIN IN AFGHANISTAN, THAT IS
DOWN FROM A PEAK OF 100,000 IN
2010.
DURING THE SURGE ORDERED BY
PRESIDENT OBAMA.
BUT THE TRANSITION HAS BEEN
BARRED BY ONE OF THE MOST
VIBRANT AFGHAN SPRINGS IN RECENT
YEAR.
THE ATTACK CAME IN KABUL WHEN A
BOMB TARGETING A SHIITE CLERIC
KILLED THREE CIVILIANS.
FOR MORE ON ALL OF THIS, WE TURN
TO THREE PEOPLE WITH EXTENSIVE
EXPERIENCE DEALING WITH
AFGHANISTAN.
DAVID SEDNEY SERVED IN
AFGHANISTAN ON THE NATIONAL
SECURITY COUNCIL STAFF, AND THEN
AS DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR AFGHANISTAN,
PAKISTAN, AND CENTRAL ASIA.
RETIRED ARMY COLONEL DAVID LAMM
WAS THE CHIEF OF STAFF TO THE
COMBINED FORCES COMMAND IN
AFGHANISTAN IN 2004 AND 2005.
HE'S NOW AT THE NATIONAL DEFENSE
UNIVERSITY.
AND PAMELA CONSTABLE COVERS
SOUTH ASIA FOR THE WASHINGTON
POST.
SHE'S RECENTLY BACK FROM KABUL.
BACK LAST WEEK, TELL US A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT THESE TWININGS THAT
ARE HAPPENING TODAY HOW MUCH OF
A DIFFERENCE DOES IT MAKE THAT
THERE'S A HAND OVER AND IS
AFGHANISTAN READY AND HOW MUCH
DIFFERENCE DOES IT MAKE.
>>  IT'S BEEN REALLY QUITE A SET
OF STUNNING DEVELOPMENTS, WHEN I
WAS THERE JUST A FEW WEEKS AGO
EVERYTHING WAS GLOOM AND DOOM,
THE TALIBAN WERE EXHIBITING
EXTRAORDINARY FEROCITY AND REACH
AND GOING AFTER INTERNATIONAL
CHARITIES, EVEN GOING AFTER
INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS, SUPREME
COURT, THEY REALLY SEEMED TO BE
GOING FOR BROKE.
SO THIS OBVIOUSLY WE'RE NOW
LEARNING THAT THERE WAS A DOUBLE
TRACK GOING ON AND THEY HAVE
BEEN QUIETLY NEGOTIATING WITH
AMERICAN OFFICIALS AND OTHERS
THE WHOLE TIME.
BUT THEY'RE VERY GOOD AT PLAYING
GAMES.
SO WE ARE NOT GOING TO --
>> Ifill:  TALIBAN YOU MEAN?
>>  YES.
SAYING THAT THEY WANT TO TALK
THEY HAVE BEEN WANTING TO TALK
WITH THE AMERICANS A LONG TIME.
>> Ifill:  WHICH LEADS TO MY
NEXT QUESTION, HOW KARZAI
PREPARED TO GO TO TH ATTABLE
ALSO TO ACCEPT SECURITY
RESPONSIBILITIES THAT ARE NOW
BEING PUT IN HIS LAP.
>>  WELL, FOR A LONG TIME HIS
MAJOR ISSUE WOULD BE TO
NEGOTIATE WITH THE TALIBAN BUT
HE IS PRETTY ADAMANT ABOUT KNOWS
NEGOTIATIONS BEING CONDUCTED IN
AFGHANISTAN, HE IS NOT A FAN OF
THEM BEING CARRIED ON OUTSIDE
THE COUNTRY, NOR IS HE A BIG FAN
OF HAVING BILATERAL NEGOTIATIONS
GOING ON BETWEEN U.S., TALIBAN A
YEAR OR SO AGO, BRITISH, U.S.
AND TALIBAN HE CONSIDERS THAT A
BILATERAL ISSUE THAT HE NEEDS TO
DEAL WITH THAT THE TALIBAN AND
THAT NEEDS TO HAPPEN IN
AFGHANISTAN.
TALIBAN ON THE OTHER HAND DON'T
RECOGNIZE KARZAI'S GOVERNMENT
AND THAT POSES A BIG PROBLEM.
>> Ifill:  DAVID SEDNEY IS
WHAT WE'RE SEEING HAPPENING THAT
PAM CONSTABLE DESCRIBES IS IT
SYMBOLIC OR REAL?
>>  I THINK IT'S BOTH SYMBOLIC
IN THE SENSE THAT THIS IS A REAL
TURNING POINT IN THE TRANSITION
OF LEAD SECURITY RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THE AFGHANS TODAY.
THAT SHOWS THAT THE COMMITMENT
OF THE UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY CAN
BUILD AFGHAN SECURITY FORCES
THAT ARE ABLE TO DEFEND THEIR
OWN COUNTRY IS COMING TO
FRUITION.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME, THE DESIRE
OF ALL AFGHANS INCLUDING THE
TALIBAN AFTER 35 YEARS OF WAR IS
REFLECTIVE IN THIS AGREEMENT TO
BEGIN TALKS.
I AGREE WITH PAMELA THIS IS
REALLY IMPORTANT DEVELOPMENT.
IT'S SYMBOLIC BUT I THINK THERE
ARE GOING TO BE A LOT OF THINGS
THAT WILL PLAY OUT OVER THE
SUMMER AND WE'LL SEE A VERY
DIFFERENT SITUATION IN
AFGHANISTAN BY THE END OF THIS
FIGHTING SEASON BY THE EBBED OF
REPRESENT.
>> Ifill:  THE PRESIDENT SAID
THERE ARE GOING TO BE BUMPS IN
THE ROAD NOT JUST ABOUT THE
MEETINGS IN QATAR ALSO TALKING
ABOUT THE HAND OVER, RIGHT?
>>  YES, THERE IS SO MANY
ASPECTS OF THIS, NUMBER ONE.
THERE'S BEEN A LOT OF ROSY
OPTIMISTIC VIEWS ON THIS, THE
STATE OF THE AFGHAN DEFENSE
FORCES BY THOSE WHO SPENT HUGE
AMOUNTS OF MONEY AND EFFORT AND
TIME AND LIVES TO TRAIN THEM.
BUT HONESTLY TALKING OUTSIDE THE
ARMY THERE'S A GREAT, GREAT DEAL
OF PROGRESS THAT NEEDS TO BE
MADE BEFORE THEY CAN REALLY
STAND UP.
EVEN WITHIN THE ARMY THERE'S A
LOT OF CONCERN ABOUT FACTIONAL
AND ETHNIC DIVISION IN THE ARMY
AND LEADERSHIP THERE.
THAT IS A GREAT CONCERN THERE.
NOT ONLY ABOUT BEING ABLE TO
FIGHT BUT THE WILL TO FIGHT.
AND THE OTHER BUMPS IN THE ROAD
WHICH EVERYONE IN AFGHANISTAN IS
VERY WORRIED ABOUT IS WHETHER
KARZAI IN FACT IS GOING TO BE
WILLING TO STEP DOWN AND LEAVE
POWER AS HE HAS PROMISED TO DO
AS CONSTITUTION REQUIRES HIM TO
DO.
>> Ifill:  THAT IS -- THERE IS
AN ELECTION WHICH IS LOOMING AND
THAT S THE POLITICAL POTENTIAL
IS ALSO A HUGE BUMP POTENTIALLY.
>> THE POLITICAL BUMP IS THE
MOST HIGH RISK BUMP OF THEM ALL.
THE ELECTION HAS TO BE SECURED.
WE HAVE INDEED PASSED SECURITY
OVER TO THE AFGHAN FORCES, I
NOTICE THE WORDS I USE AS WE
PASS CONTROL OVER TO THE AFGHAN
FORCES, I WOULD VENTURE TO SAY
THAT WE PASS RESPONSIBILITY AND
POTENTIAL BLAME FOR WHAT
HAPPENS.
I'M NOT SURE THEY'RE IN CONTROL.
GIVEN ALL THAT, THAT SAME SET OF
SECURITY FORCES NOW HAS TO
SECURE AN ELECTION PROCESS AND
MY EXPERIENCE WITH THAT IN 2005
AND SUBSEQUENT ELECTION OR 2004
THE SUBSEQUENT ELECTION THAT'S A
DIFFICULT TASK, IT WAS A MAJOR
EFFORT FOR THE AMERICANS WHILE
WE WERE IN AFGHANISTAN AND I'M
NOT SAYING ON THE OUTCOME THERE,
I THINK -- MIGHT BE A TASK TOO
FAR FOR THE AFGHAN SECURITY
FORCES.
>> Ifill:  YOU THINK ABOUT
THAT DAVID?
>>  I'M MUCH MORE OP TOE MISS
TUCK I BELIEVE THE AFGHAN
SECURITY FORCES HAVE SHOWN OVER
THE LAST SIX TO NINE MONTHS
ABILITY TO TAKE ON THE SECURITY
RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THEIR OWN
COUNTRY AND THEY HAVE DONE H
THAT BY DEFEATING THOSE ATTACKS
THAT PAMELA MENTIONED.
SHE WAS CORRECT, THAT THERE WAS
A LOT OF LASHING OUT BY THE
TALIBAN, BUT THEY HAVE NOT TAKEN
BACK ANY TERRITORY THAT THEY HAD
LOST IN THE PREVIOUS YEAR.
>> Ifill:  EVEN ATTACKS LIKE
THIS RED CROSS ATTACK THAT SHE
REFERENCED THAT IS NOT WORRYING
TO YOU?
>>  SO, CERTAINLY IT'S WORRYING
AND CONCERNING THAT THE TALIBAN
HAVE GONE AFTER INTERNATIONAL
INS TIP TALKS LIKE THE RED CROSS
BUT THAT DOESN'T MEAN THAT THEY
ARE REGAINING TERRITORY THEY'RE
NOT REGAINING THE SUPPORTIVE
PEOPLE.
THEY'RE LOSING SUPPORT FROM THE
PEOPLE AND THEY ARE IN A
POSITION WHERE THEY REALLY NEED
TO COME TO THE TABLE.
>> Ifill:  IS THERE A
DISTINCTION THAT CAN BE DRAWN
ABOUT PROGRESS IN URBAN AREAS
VERSUS PROGRESS IN THE RURAL
AREAS AND WE NOT OVERSTATE
WHATEVER WE FEAR?
>>  I WOULD SAY THERE IS FAIRLY
BIG DIFFERENCE, PARTICULARLY
TALKING ABOUT THE ABILITY OF
SECURITY FORCES TO PROPEL AND
RESPOND TO ATTACKS.
THEY HAVE BEEN DOING A VERY GOOD
JOB IN THE CITY.
BUT IN THE CITIES YOU HAVE
MULTIPLE SOURCES, YOU HAVE LOCAL
POLICE, UP THE INTELLIGENCE
POLICE, YOU HAVE SPECIAL POLICE
FORCES AND THE ARMY.
AS WELL AS BACK UP FROM
INTERNATIONAL FORCES.
SO, THEY HAVE GOT A LOT MORE
ABILITY TO ZERO IN AND GO AFTER
AND GET SOME OF THE SUICIDE
BOMBERS AND GET SOME OF THESE
PEOPLE OUT OF THERE.
IN REMOTE RURAL DISTRICTS IT'S
MUCH MORE DIFFICULT.
THE AFGHAN ARMY IS SPREAD VERY,
VERY THIN.
POLICE ARE THINNER AND NOT HATS
WELL TRAINED AND LOCAL POLICE
FORCES WHICH ARE BEING STOOD UP
NOW TO DEFEND VILLAGES WITH
ALMOST NO TRAINING AT ALL.
SO THE PICTURE IS MUCH LESS SANG
QUINN OUT PARTICULAR CERTAIN
AREAS THERE WERE DISTRICTS,
MANY PROVE CONVINCES THAT ARE
UNDER TALIBAN CONTROL, NOT
NECESSARILY THICKLY FILLED WITH
FOOT SOLDIERS BUT
PSYCHOLOGICALLY UNDER TALIBAN
CONTROL.
>> Ifill:  I WANT TO ASK YOU
ABOUT ANOTHER PIECE OF THIS,
DAVID LAMM, THE ECONOMICS OF THE
SITUATION, UNDERLYING ECONOMIC
STRENGTH IN AFGHANISTAN TO
SUPPORT THESE TRANSITIONS BUT
ALSO HOW MUCH THIS IS GOING TO
COST AND WHO IS GOING TO PAY.
>> WELL, FROM THE AFGHAN
NATIONAL SECURITY FORCES SIDE I
THINK THE NUMBER IS ABOUT 4.1
BILLION DOLLARS A YEAR.
OF WHICH WE'RE GOING TO ASK
EUROPEAN FOR ABOUT $2.1 BILLION,
THE AFGHANS HAVE TO CONTRIBUTE
ABOUT 500 MILLION TO THAT THE
REST WOULD BE THE UNITED STATES.
I THINK WHAT WE SHOULD BE
PREPARED FOR FOR THE UNITED
STATES TO PICK UP MOST OF THAT
BILL.
IF NOT ALL OF THAT BILL.
BECAUSE IF THE POLITICAL PROCESS
AND ELECTION BECOMES UNRAVELED,
POLITICAL WILL AND MANY OF THESE
COUNTRIES, PARTICULARLY EUROPEAN
ALLIES WILL SAY, WHAT IS THIS
ALL ABOUT, WHY ARE WE PUTTING
MORE MONEY IN TO THIS EFFORT,
AND I THINK THE AMERICANS HAVE
TO BE READY TO GO THAT ENTIRE
BAG OF MONEY.
>> Ifill:  DOES THAT MEAN THAT
IT'S TOO SOON FOR AMERICANS TO
BREATHE EASY SAY WE'RE BACKING
OUT OF AFGHANISTAN EVEN WITH
DEADLINES LOOMING NEXT YEAR,
EVEN WITH THIS HAND OVER TODAY.
>>  I AGREE THAT IT'S SOMETHING
THAT WE CAN'T RISK, BUT AT THE
SAME TIME WE SHOULD FEEL QUITE
PROUD OF WHAT WE SAID WE WERE
GOING TO DO WE'VE DONE.
WE BUILT UP THE AVERAGE SECURITY
FORCES, DRIVEN THE TALIBAN TO A
SITUATION WHERE THEY CAN BE
CONTROLLED BY THE AFGHAN FORCES,
I HAVE TO TAKE A LITTLE
DIFFERENT VIEW IN PAMELA ON THAT
THERE ARE AREAS WHERE THE
TALIBAN ARE IN CONTROL OF SOME
DISTRICTS BUT THESE ARE NOT
AREAS THAT THEY HAV RETAIN
CONTROL IN THE LAST YEAR.
SECURITY FORCES HAVE KEPT WHAT
THEY WON OVER THE LAST YEAR
THEY'RE GOING TO START PUSHING
OUT.
PARTICULARLY IN THE TALIBAN
HEARTLAND AREAS OF KANDAHAR
PROVINCES WHERE THEY STARTED,
THE KEY BATTLES HAVE BEEN FOUGHT
WHERE THE TALIBAN HAVE SUFFERED
THEIR GREATEST.
>> Ifill:  THE U.S., THIS
CANNOT HAPPEN WITHOUT CONTINUED
U.S. PRESSURE AND INVOLVEMENT.
>>  WITH U.S. SUPPORT AT THIS
POINT.
U.S. AND OUR NATO ALLIES WE'RE
NOT LEADING THE OPERATIONS OR
PLANNING THE OPERATIONS WE'RE
PROVIDING SUPPORT, WE'RE
STANDING BY THE AFGHANS.
WHAT THEY'RE SHOWING AND
SOMETIMES THEY SUFFER TACTICAL
SETBACKS ON THE BATTLEFIELD THEY
ARE ALWAYS GOING BACK, GOING
BACK TO THE PLACES WHERE THEY
HAVE BEEN PUSHED OUT OF TAKING
THAT TERRITORY BACK AND PUSHING
THE TALIBAN FURTHER BACK ON
THEIR HEELS.
>>  DAVID SEDNY, DAVID LAMM, PAM
CONSTABLEHANK T YOU VERY MUCH.
>>
>> Brown: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR, SENATOR RAND PAUL ON
IMMIGRATION REFORM; A NEW STUDY
FINDS SCHOOLS ARE FAILING TO
EDUCATE TEACHERS; VIOLENT
CLASHES OVER RELIGION IN
MYANMAR; AND POETRY THAT GIVES
VOICE TO AFGHAN WOMEN.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: LEADERS AT THE
G-8 SUMMIT PRESSED FOR SYRIAN
PEACE TALKS TODAY.
BUT A FINAL STATEMENT DID NOT
CALL FOR THE OUSTER OF PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD, AND DID NOT
MENTION MILITARY AID FOR THE
OPPOSITION.
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
DEFENDED HIS COUNTRY'S ARMS
SHIPMENTS TO THE ASSAD REGIME,
BUT HE WARNED EUROPE AGAINST
JOINING THE U.S. IN ARMING THE
REBELS.
>>  WE BELIEVE THAT OUR POSITION
IS APPROACHABLE FROM A MORAL AND
LEGAL POINT OF VIEW.
ABOUT POSSIBLE WEAPON SUPPLIES
BY OUR EUROPEAN PARTNERS TO BE
ARMED SYRIAN OPPOSITION.
WHAT WILL HAPPEN WITH THOSE
WEAPONS LATER?
WHO WILL MONITOR IN WHOSE HANDS
THEY WILL END UP AND WHERE THEY
WILL TURN UP IN THE END, PERHAPS
IN EUROPE ITSELF.
>> Sreenivasan: BOTH PUTIN AND
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID THEY'RE
STILL COMMITTED TO HOSTING A
SYRIAN PEACE CONFERENCE IN
GENEVA, AS EARLY AS JULY.
SUICIDE BOMBERS IN IRAQ ATTACKED
A SHIITE MOSQUE IN BAGHDAD
TODAY, KILLING AT LEAST 34
PEOPLE.
THE FIRST BLAST HIT A
CHECKPOINT, AND IN THE
CONFUSION, A SECOND BOMBER GOT
INSIDE THE MOSQUE AND BLEW
HIMSELF UP DURING MIDDAY
PRAYERS.
SINCE APRIL, NEARLY 2,000 PEOPLE
HAVE BEEN KILLED IN IRAQ, THE
WORST VIOLENCE SINCE 2008.
IN NORTHWESTERN PAKISTAN, AT
LEAST 29 PEOPLE WERE KILLED IN A
SUICIDE BOMBING AT A FUNERAL.
SCORES OF WOUNDED WERE TAKEN TO
A LOCAL HOSPITAL.
AMONG THOSE KILLED WAS A NEWLY
ELECTED LAWMAKER.
AUTHORITIES SAID HE MAY HAVE
BEEN THE TARGET OF THE ATTACK.
U.S. SURVEILLANCE OF PHONE AND
INTERNET DATA HAS THWARTED
DOZENS OF TERROR PLOTS
WORLDWIDE, INCLUDING ONE AIMED
AT WALL STREET.
THAT'S WHAT THE DIRECTOR OF THE
NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY TOLD
THE HOUSE INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE
TODAY.
ARMY GENERAL KEITH ALEXANDER
INSISTED THE SURVEILLANCE IS
ESSENTIAL TO MAINTAINING
NATIONAL SECURITY.
>>  THESE PROGRAMS TOGETHER WITH
OTHER INTELLIGENCE HAVE
PROTECTED THE U.S. AND OUR ALLYS
FROM TERRORISTS THREATS ACROSS
THE GLOBE TO INCLUDE HELPING
PREVENT THE TERRORIST --
POTENTIAL TERRORIST EVENT OVER
50 TIMES SINCE 9/11.
>> Sreenivasan: ANOTHER WITNESS,
DEPUTY F.B.I. DIRECTOR SEAN
JOYCE, SAID ONE PLOT INVOLVED A
PLAN TO BOMB THE NEW YORK STOCK
EXCHANGE.
THE U.S. HOUSE MOVED THIS
EVENING TO ADOPT ONE OF THE MOST
SWEEPING ANTI-ABORTION BILLS IN
YEARS.
THE REPUBLICAN-BACKED MEASURE
WOULD BAN ALMOST ALL ABORTIONS
THAT TAKE PLACE 20 WEEKS AFTER
CONCEPTION.
SUPPORTERS SAID STUDIES PROVE
THAT A FETUS FEELS PAIN AFTER 20
WEEKS.
OPPONENTS SAID THE EVIDENCE IS
NOT CONCLUSIVE.
THE BILL IS NOT EXPECTED TO COME
TO A VOTE IN THE DEMOCRATIC-LED
SENATE.
BRAZIL BRACED TODAY FOR MORE
NATIONWIDE PROTESTS.
LAST NIGHT BROUGHT SOME OF THE
LARGEST DEMONSTRATIONS IN
DECADES, FUELED BY A SLUGGISH
ECONOMY AND ANGER OVER SPENDING
FOR NEXT YEAR'S WORLD CUP OF
SOCCER.
WE HAVE A REPORT NARRATED BY TOM
BARTON OF INDEPENDENT TELEVISION
NEWS.
>>  MOLOTOV COCKTAILS THROWN,
WHILE FIRED TEAR GAS.
THE MOMENT PROTESTS IN RI DE
JANAIRO TURNED VIOLENT AS CROWDS
ATTEMPTED TO SORT THE STATE
ASSEMBLY.
ACROSS BRAZIL AN ESTIMATED
200,000 PEOPLE TOOK TO THE
STREETS TO PROTEST, MOSTLY
PEACEFUL WERE HELD IN AT LEAST
SIX MAJOR CITIES.
THE COST OF THE WORLD CUP
RUNNING IN TO BILLIONS HAS
PROVED A FOCAL POINT OF
PROTESTERS.
THIS BANNER SAYS, WHEN YOUR SON
GETS SICK, TAKE HIM TO THE
STADIUM.
THIS PROTESTER IS CALLING FOR
MONEY TO BE SPENT ON SCHOOLS AND
HOSPITALS, NOT AN EXPENSIVE
FOOTBALL TOURNAMENT.
A MONTH AWAY FROM A PAPAL VISITA
YEAR AWAY FROM A WORLD CUP AND
JUST THREE YEARS FROM HOSTING
THE OLYMPICS, BRAZIL SEEMS FAR
FROM PREPARED FOR ITS MOMENT ON
THE WORLD STAGE.
>>
>> Sreenivasan: A MAJOR NEW AUTO
RECALL IS COMING.
CHRYSLER AGREED TODAY TO CALL IN
NEARLY THREE MILLION JEEP
VEHICLES.
FEDERAL SAFETY REGULATORS SAY
THEIR GAS TANKS CAN CATCH FIRE
IN A REAR-END COLLISION.
THEY SAY 51 PEOPLE DIED OVER
THREE YEARS IN FIERY CRASHES
INVOLVING JEEPS.
CHRYSLER INITIALLY INSISTED THE
TANKS ARE NOT DEFECTIVE.
THE RECALL AFFECTS JEEP GRAND
CHEROKEES FROM 1993 TO 2004, AND
JEEP LIBERTYS FROM 2002 TO 2007.
ON WALL STREET TODAY, THE DOW
JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE GAINED
138 POINTS TO CLOSE AT 15,318.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 30 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3482.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JEFF.
>> Brown: AND WE TURN TO THE
POLITICS OF IMMIGRATION.
EVEN AS THE LEGISLATION MAKES
ITS WAY THROUGH THE SENATE, JOHN
BOEHNER RAISED MAJOR NEW HURDLES
TODAY AFFECTING ITS PROSPECTS IN
THE HOUSE.
RAY SUAREZ CONTINUES HIS ONGOING
COVERAGE.
>>  THE DEPTH OF FEELINGS ON
IMMIGRATION WERE CLEAR,
PROTESTERS INTERRUPTED A HOUSE
HEARING ON A REPUBLICAN BILL
FOCUSED ENTIRELY ON ENFORCEMENT.
AS WRITTEN BY SOUTH CAROLINA
CONGRESSMAN TREY GAUDY IT WOULD
EMPOWER STATE AND LOCAL
OFFICIALS TO ENFORCE FEDERAL
IMMIGRATION LAWS AND MAKE
PASSPORT AND VISA FRAUD FELONIES
THAT COULD RESULT IN
DEPORTATION.
>>  PEOPLE DON'T LIKE THIS BILL,
DON'T VOTE FOR IT.
JUST MAKE SURE THAT WHATEVER YOU
DO VOTE FOR ULTIMATELY IS
ENFORCED.
BECAUSE THE SELECTIVE
ENFORCEMENT OF A LAW IS
DESTRUCTIONTIVE TO OUR SYSTEM.
>>  DEMOCRATS STRONGLY DISAGREE.
CALIFORNIA SAID GAUDY'S APPROACH
IS WRONG IN EVERY WAY.
>>  IT WOULD TURN MILLIONS OF
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS IN TO
CRIMINALS OVERNIGHT.
IT WOULD TURN STATE AND LOCAL
ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS AROUND THE
COUNTRY IN TO IMMIGRATION
AGENTS.
>>  BY CONTRAST, THE SENATE
IMMIGRATION BILL ENCOMPASSES
BOTH ENFORCEMENT AND PATH TO
CITIZENSHIP FOR SOME 11 MILLION
PEOPLE.
BUT HOW SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER
DISMISSED TALKS THAT HE'LL LET
THE HOUSE VOTE ON THAT MEASURE.
>>  ANY IMMIGRATION RENORM BILL
THAT IS GOING TO GO IN TO LAW
GOING TO HAVE MAJORITY OF BOTH
PARTIES SUPPORT IF WE'RE REALLY
SERIOUS ABOUT MAKING THAT
HAPPEN.
SO, I DON'T SEE ANY WAY OF
BRINGING AN IMMIGRATION BILL TO
THE FLOOR THAT DOESN'T HAVE
MAJORITY SUPPORT OF REPUBLICANS.
>>  HOURS LATER THE SENATE'S
DEMOCRATIC MAJORITY LEADER HARRY
REID SAID BOEHNER MAY YET HAVE
TO CHANGE HIS STANCE.
>>  NO MATTER WHAT HE HAS SAID
THERE CAN BE SIGNIFICANT
NATIONAL PRESSURE ON THE HOUSE
TO DO SOMETHING ON IMMIGRATION.
I'M ONLY WORRIED ABOUT WHAT IS
GOING TO HAPPEN HERE.
>>  REID SAID JULY 4 AS TARGET
FOR FIN ARING THE SENATE BILL
AND MORE AMENDMENTS WERE DEBEEN
BAITED TODAY.
THEY INCLUDED PROPOSAL FROM
SOUTH DAKOTA REPUBLICAN JOHN
BOONE HE WANTED TO REQUIRE 700
MILES OF DOUBLE LAYERED FENCE BE
BUILT ALONG THE MEXICAN BORDER
BEFORE LETTING ANYONE APPLY FOR
PERMANENT LEGAL STATUS.
>>  IT IS IMPORTANT IN MY VIEW,
MR. PRESIDENT, THAT WE HAVE A
VISIBLE, TANGIBLE WAY IN WHICH
WE MAKE IT VERY CLEAR THAT THIS
IS A DETERRENT TO PEOPLE COMING
TO THIS COUNTRY ILLEGALLY.
>> VERMONT SENATOR AND OTHER
DEMOCRATS OBJECTED, THE FENCE
PLAN IS JUST ANOTHER ROADBLOCK
TO GRANTING CITIZENSHIP.
>>  IT CAN'T BE RIGGED BY SOME
ILLUSIVE PRECONDITION.
WE SHOULD TREAT PEOPLE FAIRLY,
NOT HAVE THEIR FATE DETERMINED
BY MATTERS BEYOND THEIR CONTROL.
>>  HIS MEASURE WAS ULTIMATELY
DEFEATED.
WE'RE SPEAKING WITH LAWMAKERS
NOR A SENSE OF THE DIFFERENT
PERSPECTIVE SHAPING THE
LEGISLATION AS IT MAKES ITS WAY
THROUGH THE POLITICAL PROCESS.
THE CONVERSATIONS BEGIN WITH
SENATOR RAND PAUL OF KENTUCKY.
SENATOR, THANKS FOR JOINING ME.
>>  GLAD TO BE WITH YOU.
>>  SHOULD AN EVENT IMMIGRATION
REFORM PLAN INCLUDE A WAY FOR
THE MILLIONS OF UNDOCUMENTED
PEOPLE CURRENTLY LIVING IN THE
COUNTRY TO EVENTUALLY BECOME
CITIZENS?
>>  I THINK THERE ARE TWO STAGES
OF WHAT WE NEED TO DECIDE.
FOR THOSE WHO ARE HERE WHO ARE
UNDOCUMENTED SHOULD WE GIVE THEM
A LEGAL STATUS, "WE DOCUMENT
THEM SO THAT THEY CAN PAY TAXES
AND LIVE LEGALLY AND COME OUT OF
THE SHADOWS.
TO THAT I SAY, YES.
I THINK IT ALSO, THOUGH, AS WE
ALLOW THAT TO OCCUR THAT SHOULD
BE DEPENDENT UPON THE BORDER
BECOMING MORE SECURE SO WE DON'T
HAVE THE SAME PROBLEM AGAIN IN
TEN YEARS.
SO LEGALIZATION IS THE FIRST
STEP, NOW WHAT I WOULD PROPOSE
IS IN STEPPED OF CREATING A NEW
PATHWAY TO CITIZENSHIP I WOULD
ALLOW PEOPLE WHO ARE HERE ON
WORK VISAS TO ALSO SIMULTANEOUS
STAND IN THE SAME LINE THAT A
PERSON IN MEXICO CITY IS RIGHT
NOW, IF YOU'RE IN MEXICO CITY
YOU WANT TO COME TO OUR COUNTRY
YOU WANT FOB A CITIZEN THERE IS
A LINE.
I WOULD LET THEM STAND IN THE
SAME LINE I JUST WOULDN'T CREATE
A NEW LINE.
THIS MAY SOUND LIKE SEMANTICS
BUT IT'S IMPORTANT TO A LOOT OF
US THAT THEY NOT BE GIVEN A
PRIVILEGE FOR BREAKING THE LAW
BUT THAT THEY BE GIVEN SOMETHING
THAT WOULD BE EQUIVALENT TO
SOMEONE NEW COMING IN TO THE
COUNTRY.
>>  IF YOU UNCOUPLE LEGAL
RESIDENTS FROM THE PATH 6
CITIZENSHIP, CURRENTLY IF YOU'RE
LEGALLY RESIDENTS.
UNITED STATES YOU CAN EMBARK ON
THE CITIZENSHIP PROCESS.
DOES THAT DISCOURAGE PEOPLE WHO
ARE ALREADY IN FAMILIES THERE
ARE MIXED STATUS, HAVE CITIZENS
IN THEM, PEOPLE WHO HAVE ALREADY
COMMITTED TO LIFE IN A
COMMUNITY, WORK LIVES HERE FROM
PLAYING BY THE RULES AS WE NOW
WANT TO BRING PEOPLE IN OUT OF
THE SHADOWS.
>>  I THINK WHAT WOULD
DISCOURAGE THEM IF WE DON'T HAVE
ENOUGH WORK VISAS, I AM FOR
NORMALIZING ALL THE PEOPLE HERE,
I WOULD DO IT GRADUALLY OVER
ABOUT A FIVE-YEAR PERIOD, WHAT I
WOULD SAY IS THAT LEGALIZATION
IS THE MOST IMPORTANT STEP THEN
CITIZENSHIP IS A PRIVILEGE, I
THINK WE CAN DISCUSS HOW WE DO
THAT DOWN THE ROAD.
AND IT COULD BE PART OF THIS
BILL AS FAR AS I'M CONCERNED,
BUT TO ME THE BIG STEP IS, THE
GANG OF EIGHT, THEY SAY
LEGALIZATION, THE DOCUMENTATION
PART CANNOT BE DEPENDENT ON
BORDER SECURITY AND I'M SORTF O
THE OPPOSITE.
AS A CONSERVATIVE I WANT THE
GOVERNMENT TO VERIFY THAT THEY
REALLY ARE GOING TO DO WHAT THEY
SAY BECAUSE I HAVE MY DOUBTS
ABOUT GOVERNMENT'S EFFICIENCY OR
WILL POWER TO SECURE THE BORDER.
WHAT I'M SAYING IS, WE HAVE TO
SECURE THE BORDER, WE CAN DO IT
SORT OF SIMULTANEOUS WITH
DOCUMENTATION BUT I DON'T THINK
WE SHOULD DOCUMENT EVERYONE AND
THEN HOPE THAT THE GOVERNMENT
LATER WILL DO THE BORDER
SECURITY.
I DON'T THINK IT WILL EVER
HAPPEN THEN.
>>  GIVE PEOPLE AN EXAMPLE OF
HOW THAT TRIGGERING MECHANISM
WOULD WORK.
IF YOU SET UP THIS SECURITY AND
VERIFICATION SYSTEM THAT
EVENTUALLY WORKS TO THE
SATISFACTION OF THE CONGRESS
THEN ANOTHER PARTF O THE PROCESS
WOULD BE TRIGGERED?
>>  MY BILL OR MY AMENDMENT TO
THIS BILL IS CALLED TRUST BUT
VERIFY, I WOULD ALLOW
DOCUMENTATION TO BEGIN, THERE'S
ABOUT 11 MILLION PEOPLE HERE.
THE FIRST YEAR YOU PROBABLY
DOCUMENT BETWEEN A MILLION AND
TWO MILLION.
THAT MAY BE THE CAPACITY OF THE
SYSTEM ANYWAY BECAUSE WE HAVE TO
BACKGROUND CHECKS ON ALL THE
PEOPLE, FIND OUT WHY THEY'RE
HERE OR NOT HERE THEN TRY TO
NORMALIZE THEM.
SO I WOULD DO A MILLION OR TWO
THEN AT THE END OF THE YEAR I
WOULD VOTE AND SAY, IS THE
BORDER MORE SECURE THAN IT WAS A
YEAR AGO AND THE PROCESS WOULD
CONTINUE AS LONG AS CONGRESS
KEEPS VOTING THAT THE BORDER IS
BECOMING INCREASINGLY SECURE.
I WOULD ALSO HAVE SOME
PARAMETERS LIKE CERTAIN MILES OF
FENCE HAVE TO BE BUILT EACH
YEAR.
ENTRY-EXIT DEVIDEOS HAVE TO BE
DEVELOPED.
WE CAN NO LONGER LET PEOPLE
COME AND LEAVE THE PREMISES IF
THEY HAVE ENBE ARRESTED COMING
IN ILLEGALLY THEY SHOULD GET A
VERY QUICK TRIAL IF THEY CAME IN
ILLEGALLY BE SENT BACK HOME.
ALL OF THESE EFFICIENCY ITEMS
WOULD BE VOTED ON EACH YEAR AS
TO WHETHER OCCURRING, BUT I
WOULD ALLOW DOCUMENTATION
PROCESS TO GO AHEAD AND START.
CITIZENSHIP I WOULD JUST SIMPLY
CHANGE THE LAW TO SAY YOU CAN BE
HERE ON A WORK VISA, AND YOU CAN
GET IN CITIZENSHIP LINE AT THE
SAME TIME.
>> IT SOUNDS LIKE YOU'RE TAKING
THE OVERSIGHT AND VAIR ANY
OCCASION OUT OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF HOMELAND SECURITY WHERE IT
MIGHT CURRENTLY RESIDE AND
PUTTING IT WITH THE CONGRESS,
THAT'S A CONGRESS THESE DAYS CAN
HARDLY AGREE THAT THE SUNRISES
IN THE EAST AND SETS IN THE
WEST, IT'S GOING TO HAVE A
YEARLY APPROVAL PROCESS THAT'S
GOING TO WORK?
>> HE APPROVAL PROCESS WOULD
NOT BE VOTING OVER INDIVIDUAL
ITEMS, YOU WOULD BE APPROVING AN
OVERALL REPORT AS TO WHETHER OR
NOT THE ITEMS THAT WERE IN THE
BILL ARE BEING ADHERED TO.
THE REASON WE DO THIS, THERE'S
NOT MUCH TRUST ON WHAT WE DO IN
WASHINGTON AND WITH GOOD REASON
SOMETIMES.
SO MUCH OF LEGISLATION DELEGATES
THE AUTHORITY TO BUREAUCRATS TO
DO THIS THEN IT NEVER GETS DONE.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN OBAMA CARE
THERE'S 18, 1900 REFERENCES TO
THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH SHALL
DECIDE AT A LATER DATE.
REALLY YOU ELECTED YOUR
REPRESENTATIVES TO DECIDE THESE
THINGS.
WE SHOULD WRITE IN TO THE BILL
HOW WE SECURE THE BILL AND THEN
WE SHOULD BE THE JUDGE AND JURY
ON WHETHER OR NOT IT'S ACTUALLY
HAPPENING.
I THINK IT'S A GREAT WAY TO GET
CONGRESS INVOLVED BECAUSE WHEN
YOU GET CONGRESS INVOLVED YOU'RE
GETTING THE PEOPLE INVOLVED
THROUGH THEIR REPRESENTATION.
BETTER THAN LETTING UNELECTED
BUREAUCRATS DO IT, I THINK.
>> SENATOR, BEFORE WE GO,
TODAY'S SPEAKER BOEHNER AFFIRMED
THAT HE WOULD NOT LET A VOTE
COME UP ON HIS SIDE OF THE
BUILDING WITHOUT A MAJORITY OF
THE REPUBLICAN CAUCUS PREPARED
TO VOTE FOR IMMIGRATION REFORM.
WHAT DOES THAT DO TO THE FATE OF
COMPREHENSIVE REFORM FOR 201?
>>  I THINK THAT MEANS THE BILL
WILL COME UP BE A MUCH STRONGER
AND BETTER BILL.
I LIKE THAT ATTITUDE, BECAUSE
WHAT THAT DOES IS IT GIVES
LEVERAGE TO CONSERVATIVES LIKE
MYSELF WHO WANT IMMIGRATION
REFORM BUT WANT IT TO BE DONE IN
A LAWFUL MANNER THAT IS FAIR TO
EVERYBODY.
SO I THINK IF HE HOLDS TO THAT
WHICH I THINK HE WILL HOLD TO
THAT WE GET A STRONGER BILL.
THIS IS COMING FROM SOMEBODY WHO
WANTS IMMIGRATION REFORM.
I THINK THE SYSTEM IS HORRIBLY
BROKENF WE DO NOTHING IT'S A BIG
MISTAKE.
I WANT TO SEE IMMIGRATION REFORM
BUT I WANT IT TO OBEY A RULE OF
LAW WITH A SECURE BORDER, WITH
SECURING THAT THE VOTE ONLY TO
GO CITIZENS AND THAT WELFARE
ONLY GOES TO CITIZENS.
IF ALL THESE THINGS ARE TAKEN
CARE OF I THINK BOTH PARTIES
COULD GET BEHIND A BILL LIKE
THIS.
>>  SENATOR RAND PAUL OF
KENTUCKY.
THANKS A LOT FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>>  LATE TODAY THE CONGRESSIONAL
BUDGET OFFICE SAYS SENATE
IMMIGRATION BILL WOULD CUT DID I
SETS BY $19 BILLION OVER TEN
YEARS.
ESTIMATED EIGHT OF THE 11
MILLION PEOPLE IN THE US
ILLEGALLY WOULD GAIN LEGAL
STATUS.
TOMORROW WE'LL HAVE DIFFERENT
TAKE ON IMMIGRATION DEBATE FROM
VIRGINIA DEMOCRAT.
>> Brown: NEXT, THE TRAINING OF
TEACHERS, AND A NEW REPORT THAT
CONCLUDES TOO MUCH OF THAT
PREPARATION IS NOT ADEQUATE.
THE STUDY WAS CONDUCTED BY THE
NATIONAL COUNCIL ON TEACHER
QUALITY, AN INDEPENDENT RESEARCH
AND ADVOCACY GROUP.
THE REPORT LOOKED AT TEACHING
PROGRAMS AT MORE THAN 600
INSTITUTIONS IN THE U.S., AND
FOUND WHAT IT CALLED AN
"INDUSTRY OF MEDIOCRITY."
AMONG THE CONCLUSIONS: JUST ONE
OF EVERY FOUR PROGRAMS RESTRICTS
ADMISSIONS FOR TEACHING
CANDIDATES TO THE TOP HALF OF
COLLEGE STUDENTS.
AND ABOUT 70% OF ALL PROGRAMS
ARE NOT PROVIDING ELEMENTARY
TEACHER CANDIDATES WITH
SUFFICIENT AND CURRENT READING
TRAINING.
BUT THE REPORT'S FINDINGS AND
METHODOLOGY HAVE COME UNDER
STRONG CRITICISM.
OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT FOR
EDUCATION, JOHN MERROW, JOINS US
NOW.
JOHN, STILL IN THE PICTURE FOR
US ABOUT THIS WHAT REPORT SEES
AS A PROBLEMS WITH TRAINING
TEACHERS, WHAT KINDS OF THINGS
DOES IT SAY AREN'T BEING DONE
WELL?
>>  IT ARGUES THAT TEACHER --
MOST TEACHER TRAINING
INSTITUTION DON'T TAKE TRAINING
SERIOUSLY, AS IF IT'S NOT REALLY
THEIR MISSION TO TRAIN TEACHERS
THAT THEY LOOK AT TEACHERS
SHOULD BE A CLEAN SLATE READY TO
GO IN AND TREAT EACH CLASS AS A
UNIQUE EXPERIENCE.
AND THERE FOR WHEN THEY GO IN TO
THEIR FIRST YEAR OF TEACHING
THEY'RE INADEQUATELY PREPARED.
REPORT IS TALKING ABOUT 200,000
MEN AND WOMEN WHO COME OUT OF
TEACHER TRAINING EVERY YEAR AND
TEACH ONE AND A HALF MILLION
KIDS DURING THAT FIRST YEAR.
WE ALSO KNOW THAT QUITE OFTEN
FIRST YEAR TEACHERS ARE PUT WITH
DISADVANTAGED KIDS.
IT'S A DOUBLE WHAMMY IF THEY'RE
NOT WELL PREPARED.
THE REPORT GIVES STARS TO --
THERE ARE 608 INSTITUTIONS THAT
PARTICIPATED OR THAT INVOLVED.
ONLY FOUR GOT FOUR STARS WHICH
IS THE TOP SCORE.
ONLY FOUR OUT OF 608 GOT FOUR
STARS FOR THEIR PROGRAMS.
AND 162 PROGRAMS GOT ZERO STARS.
100 PROGRAMS GOT THREE, THREE
AND A HALF OR FOUR STARS OUT OF
608.
301 PROGRAMS GOT ONE STAR.
IT'S A SCATHING REPORT.
>> LET ME JUST POINT OUT AS WE
SAID THAT THERE WAS A LOT OF
PUSHBACK HERE.
A LOT OF CRITICISM OF THE
METHODOLOGY AND EVEN OF THE
POINT OF VIEW OF THE PEOPLE WHO
DID IT.
>>  ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
KATE WALSH IS THE HEAD OF THE
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF TEACHER
QUALITY IS KNOWN AS A HARSH
CRITIC OF TEACHER EDUCATION, IF
YOU GO TO PAGE 78 OF THE
FOOTNOTE YOU'LL FIND THAT ONLY
1% OF TEACHER TRAINING
INSTITUTIONS AGREED TO
PARTICIPATE.
THERE WAS WE SHOWNLY A BOYCOTT,
MANY FELT THAT SHE BEGAN WITH
HER CONCLUSIONS THERE FOR
REFUSED TO PARTICIPATE.
THAT SAID, IN THAT SENSE IT'S A
BAD STUDY BECAUSE THEY DIDN'T GO
TO CAMPUSES, THEY DIDN'T SIT IN
ON CLASSES, THEY DIDN'T HAVE THE
PARTICIPATION.
THEY READ COURSE CATALOGS AND
SILLIBI.
IT'S A LITTLE BIT, JEFF, LIKE
GOING TO THE DOCTOR FOR YOUR
PHYSICAL AND SHE SAYS, YOU DON'T
HAVE TO BOTHER COMING IN TO THE
OFFICE, JUST WALK BY MY WINDOW
AND I'LL GIVE YOU YOUR PHYSICAL.
THAT SOUNDS TERRIBLE, BUT IN
THIS CASE THE PATIENT, TEACHER
EDUCATIONS LIMPING AND COUGHING
BADLY AND THE DOCTOR PROBABLY
CAN SAY SOMETHING IS WRONG.
>>  ALL OF THIS, OF COURSE, GOES
TO VERY REAL ISSUE IN EDUCATION,
YOU'VE COVERED A LOT FOR US.
WHAT DO WE WANT FROM TEACHERS,
WHAT KIND OF -- HOW BEST TO
TRAIN THEM, WHAT IS THE RIGHT
CREDENTIAL FOR THEM, THE ANALOGY
IF WE HEAR OF LAW SCHOOLS AND
MEDICAL SCHOOLS I GATHER HAS
NEVER QUITE COME TOGETHER.
THIS IS STILL A REAL DEBATE,
RIGHT?
>>  IT IS STILL A REAL DEBATE.
AND SOME OF THE POINTS THAT THE
REPORT MAKES ARE SHOCKING AND
ALSO TRUE.
IT'S VERY EASY TO BECOME A
TEACHER, THEY SAY THAT ONLY A
QUARTER OF TEACHER TRAINING
INSTITUTIONS RESTRICT THE
ADMISSION TO THE TOP HALF OF THE
CLASS THEY WILL TAKE ANYBODY IS
WHAT SHE'S SAYING.
THAT HAS TO CHANGE.
STATES COULD CHANGE THAT.
KATE TOLD ME THAT SHE HOPES THIS
WILL BE A MARKET-DRIVEN
SOLUTION, PUBLICATION OF THIS
REPORT WHICH IS A U.S. NEWS
PUBLICATION SHE IS HOPING THAT
PEOPLE WILL READ THAT SAY, I'M
NOT GOING TO THAT SCHOOL.
THEY GIVE STARS, THEY GIVE
YELLOW TRYING ELSE TO
INSTITUTION THAT SAY DON'T GO
THERE.
HER HOPE SHE SAID TO ME IS THAT
THIS WILL FORCE INSTITUTIONS TO
CHANGE.
SHE ALSO I THINK EXPECTS THAT
THERE WILL BE ALTERNATIVE WAYS
OF TRAINING TEACHERS, SCHOOL
DISTRICTS ARE CREATING THEIR OWN
TEACHERS AND THERE ARE
ALTERNATIVE ROUTES LIKE TEACHER
AMERICA.
RANDY WINEGARDEN OF THE UNION
PROPOSED THE EQUIVALENT OF BAR
EXAM FOR EVERYONE IN ORDER TO
BECOME A TEACHER.
I THINK THERE'S SOME WISDOM
THERE WE NEED TO MAKE IT HARD
THOUGH BECOME A TEACHER BUT AT
THE SAME TIME WEEP HAVE TO MAKE
IT EASIER TO BE A TEACHER.
THERE'S ALL LOT OF TEACHER
BASHING GOING ON AND PEOPLE SEE
THIS REPORT AS PART OF THAT.
>>  ALL RIGHT.
RROW A CONTINUING
DISCUSSION.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>>  THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: WE TURN NOW TO THE
SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATION OF
MYANMAR.
IN RECENT YEARS, THE COUNTRY HAS
TAKEN STEPS TO TURN ITSELF FROM
A MILITARY DICTATORSHIP INTO A
FLEDGLING DEMOCRACY.
THAT INCLUDED THE RELEASE OF
HUMAN RIGHTS LEADER AUNG SAN SUU
KYI.
JUST LAST MONTH, MYANMAR'S
PRESIDENT BECAME THE FIRST
LEADER FROM HIS COUNTRY TO VISIT
THE WHITE HOUSE IN 47 YEARS.
BUT THE TRANSFORMING NATION HAS
BEEN MARRED BY A SURGE IN
VIOLENCE AGAINST ONE OF ITS
RELIGIOUS MINORITIES.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
KIRA KAY REPORTS.
>> Reporter: ACROSS THE RICE
FIELDS OF CENTRAL MYANMAR, YOU
CAN HEAR THE NOISE OF HAMMERS
AND SAWS, THE REBUILDING OF AN
ENTIRE COMMUNITY.
>> I WAS BORN AND RAISED IN THIS
VILLAGE.
I GOT MARRIED HERE.
WE HAVE AN ATTACHMENT TO THIS
PLACE.
WE CANNOT GIVE IT UP.
>> Reporter: THIS MUSLIM ENCLAVE
OF FARMERS AND CATTLE DEALERS
SITS ON THE OUTSKIRTS OF OKKAN
TOWN, WHERE, ON APRIL 30,
ANOTHER FLARE-UP OF INCREASINGLY
FREQUENT RELIGIOUS VIOLENCE
BROKE OUT.
IT STARTED HERE IN TOWN, WHEN A
MUSLIM WOMAN BUMPED INTO A YOUNG
BUDDHIST MONK IN THE CROWDED
MARKETPLACE, CAUSING AN
ARGUMENT.
WITHIN HOURS, ANGRY BUDDHISTS
WERE ATTACKING THEIR MUSLIM
NEIGHBORS AND A MOB MARCHED ON
THE SMALL ENCLAVE.
VILLAGE CHIEF TIN WIN SAYS 64
HOUSES BURNED TO THE GROUND AS
RESIDENTS WATCHED FROM THE
BUSHES.
THE CENTPIECERE OF THE ENCLAVE,
ITS MOSQUEWAS , BADLY DAMAGED.
>> I DID NOT THINK THIS COULD
HAPPEN.
WE HAD LIVED TOGETHER
PEACEFULLY.
MUSLIMS ALWAYS PARTICIPATED IN
THE ACTIVITIES OF THE BUDDHIST
COMMUNITY.
>> Reporter: MYANMAR IS AN
OVERWHELMINGLY BUDDHIST COUNTRY,
KNOWN FOR ITS SHINING TEMPLES.
MONKS ARE REVERED HERE AND WERE
A FACE OF THE STRUGGLE FOR
DEMOCRACY AND HUMAN RIGHTS
DURING DECADES OF AUTOCRATIC
RULE.
THOUGH ONLY ABOUT 5% OF
MYANMAR'S POPULATION, MUSLIMS
OCCUPY A PROMINENT PLACE IN THE
COUNTRY'S ECONOMIC SPHERE,
SOMETIMES FOSTERING RESENTMENT.
BUT THE MILITARY LEADERSHIP KEPT
A LID ON RELIGIOUS TENSIONS,
SAYS ISLAMIC LEADER WUNNA SHWE.
THE HISTORY OF ANTI-MUSLIM
FEELINGS IS LONG, BUT IT WAS
ALWAYS DISCREET.
NOW IT HAS ERUPTED BECAUSE OF
THE TRANSITION TO DEMOCRACY.
IN THE LAST TWO YEARS, MYANMAR
HAS UNDERGONE A PROFOUND
TRANSITION AS A REFORMIST
GOVERNMENT HAS INCREASED
FREEDOMS.
DEMOCRACY ICON AUNG SAN SUU KYI
WAS ELECTED TO PARLIAMENT AFTER
DECADES OF HOUSE ARREST, AND
THERE IS A FREER FLOW OF
INFORMATION.
>> THESE NEW FREEDOMS HAVE BEEN
EXPLOITED BY A GROUP OF PEOPLE
WHO WANT TO CREATE DISCORD
BETWEEN THE DIFFERENT RELIGIONS.
THESE INDIVIDUALS USE HATE
SPEECH AND PROVOKE TENSIONS
AROUND THE COUNTRY.
MEANWHILE, THE AUTHORITIES HAVE
FAILED TO ENFORCE LAW AND ORDER.
>> Reporter: THE SURPRISING
ENTSAG OF A NEW ANTI-MUSLIM,
PRO-BUDDHIST NATIONALISM ARE A
HANDFUL OF PROMINENT MONKS, LIKE
MANDALAY-BASED WIRA THU.
>> IF WE CANNOT STOP THESE
TRENDS, THEN THE ENTIRE COUNTRY
WILL BECOME A MUSLIM STATE.
>> Reporter: WIRA THU WAS
ARRESTED IN 2003 FOR INCITING
RELIGIOUS CONFLICT, BUT WAS
RELEASED IN A 2012 AMNESTY.
NOW HE HAS BECOME THE PUBLIC
FACE OF A MOVEMENT CALLED 969.
THE NUMBERS REFER TO VARIOUS
ATTRIBUTES OF BUDDHA AND THE
MONKDOM, AND ITS BRIGHTLY
COLORED STICKERS HAVE LOWFERED
ACROSS MYANMAR IN RECENT MONTHS.
969 CALLS FOR A BOYCOTT OF
MUSLIMS, BOTH ECONOMIC AND
SOCIAL.
MEN MARRY BUDDHIST GIRLS, BUT
MUSLIM GIRLS ARE TAUGHT NOT TO
MARRY ANYONE OF A DIFFERENT
RELIGION.
MUSLIMS NEVER SELL THEIR LAND OR
PROPERTY TO BUDDHISTS AND
INSTEAD BUY OFF BUDDHISTS'
HOUSES.
IN THIS WAY THEY ARE EXPANDING
THEIR CONTROL, AND ARE
DOMINATING THE ECONOMY OF OUR
MAJOR CITIES.
>> Reporter: 969'S GROWTH WAS
FUELED BY EVENTS IN RHAKINE
STATE, WHERE, LAST JUNE,
FIGHTING BROKE OUT BETWEEN
BUDDHISTS AND THE MUSLIM ETHNIC
GROUP THE ROHINGA, OVER THE
MUSLIM RAPE AND MURDER OF A
BUDDHIST WOMAN.
IN OCTOBER CAME AN ORGANIZED
EFFORT TO ERADICATE THE MUSLIMS,
SAYS PHIL ROBERTSON OF HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH.
THEIR INVESTIGATION FOUND THAT
LOCAL BUDDHIST LEADERS INCITED
THE ATTACKS.
>> THERE WAS, FOR INSTANCE, A
STATEWIDE MEETING OF BUDDHIST
MONKS IN RAKHINE STATE THAT
CALLED PRECISELY FOR ETHNIC
CLEANSING, FOR ACTION AGAINST
THE MUSLIMS WHO THEY.. THE
RAKHINE VIEW AS AN EXISTENTIAL
THREAT AGAINST THEMSELVES.
WHAT WE CAN SAY IS THAT THE IDEA
OF IMPUNITY TO ATTACK MUSLIMS IS
APPARENTLY CONTAGIOUS.
SEEING THAT IT WAS DONE IN
ARAKAN STATE INDICATED THAT,
HEY, THEY CAN GET AWAY WITH IT
IN ARAKAN STATE, WE CAN GET AWAY
WITH IT HERE.
>> Reporter: WIRA THU USES THE
RAKHINE UPHEAVAL AS A RALLYING
CALL.
>> ANYWHERE MUSLIMS ARE AORITY,,
LIKE WHAT HAPPENED IN RAKHINE
STATE LAST YEAR.
THAT IS WHY OUR IDEA IS TO
CONTROL THE MUSLIM POPULATION.
>> Reporter: WIRATHU SAYS HE
CONDEMNS ALL VIOLENCE, AND THERE
IS NO EVIDENCE 969 MEMBERS HAVE
PLOTTED ATTACKS AGAINST MUSLIMS.
BUT 969 PROPAGANDA WAS
DISTRIBUTED IN AREAS LATER
TODAY MUCH OF THE CENTRAL
MYANMAR CITY OF MEIKHTILA LOOKS
LIKE THE AFTERMATH OF A TORNADO
OR TSUNAMI.
IN MARCH, AN ARGUMENT IN A GOLD
SHOP BETWEEN A BUDDHIST CUSTOMER
AND THE MUSLIM OWNERS SPARKED
RIOTS.
CELL PHONE VIDEO FROM THE SCENE
SHOWS BUDDHIST CROWDS TEARING
THE BUILDING APART BY HAND.
THAT NIGHT, MUSLIMS PULLED A
MONK OFF A MOTOR BIKE AND SET
HIM ON FIRE.
THE BUDDHIST COMMUNITY'S
RETALIATION WAS IMMEDIATE AND
OVERWHELMING.
IN A MUSLIM VILLAGE OUTSIDE
TOWN, WE MET SURVIVORS OF THE
MEIKHTILA VIOLENCE.
ALL BUT ONE OF THEM ASKED THAT
WE NOT REVEAL THEIR IDENTITY.
>> WHILE WE WERE HIDING, WE WERE
TERRIFIED, WONDERING, WHEN I
WILL BE KILLED?
>> Reporter: THIS 21-YEAR-OLD
SAYS HE AND 100 OTHERS FLED TO
NEARBY SWAMPLAND AFTER THE
ISLAMIC SCHOOL THEY WERE HIDING
IN WAS ATTACKED.
>> THE POLICE SAID THEY WOULD
SAVE US AND LED US OUT IN A
LINE.
BUT ON THE WAY OUT, THE CROWD
ATTACKED, SHOUTING, "DON'T COME
BACK, DON'T SET FOOT ON THIS
LAND AS THEY WERE KILLING US."
>> THEY HIT MY HUSBAND'S HEAD
WITH AN AXE, AND HE COLLAPSED.
THEN THE MOB, INCLUDING A MONK
AND PEOPLE FROM OUR VILLAGE,
THREW HIM INTO THE FIRE, STILL
ALIVE.
THEY DID THIS RIGHT IN FRONT OF
MY EYES.
>> THE CROWD WAS THERE.
AND IT REALLY WAS NOT A CROWD.
IT WAS A MOB.
THEY WERE CHANTING ANTI-MUSLIM
SLOGANS.
>> Reporter: WIN HTEIN
REPRESENTS MEIKHTILA IN THE
COUNTRY'S PARLIAMENT, AND
WITNESSED THE ATTACKS.
WHEN THEY LEARNED THAT POLICE
WERE NOT TAKING ACTION, THEY RAN
ACROSS INSIDE THE LINE AND
DRAGGED SOME YOUNG PEOPLE AND
KILLED IN FRONT OF THEM.
>> ABOUT 2,000 PEOPLE WERE
GATHERING, AND THEY WERE
CHEERING.
>> Reporter: THEY WERE CHEERING?
>> WHEN SOMEONE WAS KILLED, THEY
WILL CHEER.
>> Reporter: OVER THE THREE DAYS
OF VIOLENCE, AT LEAST 50 PEOPLE,
MOSTLY MUSLIMS, WERE BURNED
ALIVE OR HACKED TO DEATH.
18,000 WERE DISPLACED.
12 OF THE TOWN'S 13 MOSQUES WERE
DESTROYED OR BADLY DAMAGED.
>> FLAGS NOW MARK WHERE BUDDHIST
HOMES ONCE STOOD, TO PROTECT
THEM FROM LOOTERS.
IT IS DEVASTATION-- NOT
MATERIALLY, MENTALLY.
BECAUSE THE PEOPLE NOW ARE SO
DETERMINED AGAINST MUSLIMS
COMING TO THEIR OWN PLACES.
SOME PEOPLE ARE PRIVATELY
TELLING ME THAT DON'T LET THEM
COME BACK AGAIN.
>> Reporter: EVEN AMIDST THE
VIOLENCE, THERE WERE GLIMMERS OF
HUMANITY.
SOE NYUND'S 76-YEAR-OLD FATHER
WAS TOO SLOW TO ESCAPE THE MOB,
BUT SOE NYUND SAYS THE KINDNESS
OF NEIGHBORING BUDDHISTS SPARED
HIS LIFE.
>> WE HAD A FRIENDLY AND WARM
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE MONKS AND
ALSO WITH OUR BUDDHIST
NEIGHBORS.
THEY WERE THE ONES THAT HID ME
IN THE LOCAL TEMPLE.
>> Reporter: BUDDHIST FAMILIES
SUFFERED IN MEIKHTILA'S
VIOLENCE, TOO, PRIMARILY THOSE
FROM MIXED NEIGHBORHOODS.
SEVERAL HUNDRED REMAIN HOMELESS
AND CAMPED ON THE GROUNDS OF A
MONASTERY.
LOOKING OUT AT HER DESTROYED
NEIGHBORHOOD, TUN TUN KHAI SAYS
SHE LONGS FOR THE WAY LIFE USED
TO BE.
>> MUSLIMS RAN THE SMALL TEA
SHOPS.
BUDDHISTS OWNED BETELNUT STALLS,
AND MUSLIMS WOULD BUY FROM THEM.
>> Reporter: HOW DO YOU FEEL
WHEN YOU STAY HERE IN THIS CAMP
AND YOU LOOK ACROSS THE FIELD
AND SEE YOUR BURNED HOUSE?
>> IT IS HARD TO SLEEP, SO I
HAVE TO TAKE SLEEPING PILLS.
IT'S WORSE BECAUSE I ALSO DON'T
HAVE A JOB.
I AM JUST TRYING TO SURVIVE.
>> Reporter: MOST STARTLING IN
MEIKHTILA WAS THE PROMINENCE OF
969 STICKE.RS
THEY ARE NOW EVERYWHERE, EVEN ON
STALLS STANDING BESIDE SHUTTERED
MUSLIM SHOPS AND DESTROYED
MOSQUES.
AND JUST FEET FROM GROUND ZERO
OF THE VIOLENCE, THE GOLD SHOP.
DEMAND IS GREAT FOR THE 969
DVD's OPENLY FOR SALE, WITH WIRA
THU'S PORTRAIT ON THE COVER.
DON'T YOU TAKE ANY
RESPONSIBILITY THAT YOUR WORDS
MAY BE GIVING PEOPLE PERMISSION
TO ACT VIOLENTLY?
>> WHAT I HAVE DONE IS SIMPLY
AWAKEN PEOPLE TO WHAT IS GOING
ON IN OUR COUNTRY.
WHAT HAPPENED AFTERWARDS WAS
ALSO CONNECTED TO THE RAPE CASE
IN RAKHINE AND THE MURDER OF THE
BUDDHIST MONK.
THESE ARE THE FACTORS THAT
TRIGGERED THE VIOLENCE.
MY PART IS JUST TO KEEP PEOPLE
ON GUARD.
>> Reporter: THESE MONKS WANT
PUBLIC POPULARITY AND DONATIONS.
THEY DO NOT THINK ABOUT HOW
THEIR ACTIONS COULD DAMAGE
DEMOCRACY OR CAUSE PEOPLE
TROUBLE.
>> Reporter: SOME MONKS, LIKE
PUNYA WONTHA, ARE NOW SPEAKING
OUT AND TRYING TO INTERVENE.
AND HE BELIEVES THESE MONKS
SHOULD BE ARRESTED.
>> BACK DURING THE PRO-DEMOCRACY
MOVEMENT, THE GOVERNMENT AND THE
STATE-APPOINTED COUNCIL OF MONKS
WORKED TOGETHER TO IMPRISON
MONKS WHO SPOKE OUT AGAINST THE
STATE.
NOW THESE MONKS ARE PREACHING,
BUT THE AUTHORITIES HAVE FAILED
TO TAKE ACTION AGAINST THEM.
>> THE FACT OF THE MATTER IS,
POLICE ARE FAILING TO DO THEIR
JOB.
PEOPLE WHO ARE COMMITTING
VIOLENCE OR INSTIGATING VIOLENCE
ARE NOT BEING HELD RESPONSIBLE.
THIS NEEDS TO BE ADDRESSED BY
THE GOVERNMENT.
ORHERWISE, THE LARGER REFM
PROCESS COULD BE AT RISK.
>> Reporter: BACK IN OKKAN, THE
SCENE OF APRIL'S VIOLENCE, THE
VILLAGE MEN TAKE A BREAK FROM
REBUILDING THEIR HOUSES TO COME
TOGETHER FOR PRAYERS IN THEIR
STILL-DAMAGED MOSQUE.
THEY ARE STARTING LIFE OVER,
HOPING THE COEXISTENCE THEY
ENJOYED HERE FOR YEARS CAN BE
RESTORED.
>> Ifill: KIRA KAY'S STORY IS
PART OF OUR PARTNERSHIP WITH THE
BUREAU FOR INTERNATIONAL
REPORTING AND THEIR SERIES,
"FAULT LINES OF FAITH."
>> Brown: FINALLY TONIGHT, WE
END WHERE WE BEGAN, WITH
AFGHANISTAN.
BUT THIS TIME THROUGH A VERY
DIFFERENT LENS: ONE OF LANGUAGE
AND CULTURE.
FOR MANY AMERICANS, AFGHANISTAN
IS A COUNTRY SHROUDED IN
MYSTERY, PARTICULARLY ITS WOMEN,
LITERALLY SHROUDED UNDER A
BURKA, SILENT AND SEEMINGLY
IMPENETRABLE.
>> I LOOKED FOR YEARS AT THESE
BLUE BURKAS, THINKING THOSE
WOMEN BENEATH HAVE NOTHING TO
SAY, BECAUSE I DON'T HEAR THEM
SAYING ANYTHING.
>> Brown: JOURNALIST ELIZA
GRISWOLD HAS REPORTED FROM
AFGHANISTAN FOR THE LAST TEN
YEARS.
SHE WANTED TO GET BEYOND THE
HEADLINES, AND ESPECIALLY TO
UNDERSTAND THE LIVES OF RURAL
WOMEN, MOSTLY ILLITERATE
PASHTUNS LIVING ALONG THE BORDER
AREAS WITH PAKISTAN, AMID THE
DAILY REALITIES OF WAR.
HER WAY IN WAS THROUGH SHORT
POEMS CALLED "LANDAYS," EACH
JUST TWO LINES LONG, WITH 22
SYLLABLES.
>> SEPARATION, YOU SET FIRE IN
THE HEART AND HOME OF EVERY
LOVER.
>> THIS IS RURAL FOLK POETRY.
THIS IS POETRY THAT'S MEANT TO
BE ORAL.
IT'S PASSED MOUTH TO MOUTH, EAR
TO EAR.
AND THE WOMEN HAVE RECITED THESE
POEMS FOR CENTURIES.
SO THEY'VE GONE FROM TALKING
ABOUT THE RIVERBANK, WHICH IS
THE PLACE YOU GATHER WATER, AND
OF COURSE THE PLACE MEN GO TO
SPY ON THE WOMEN THEY HAVE
CRUSHES ON, TO FACEBOOK, TO THE
INTERNET.
SO THEY REALLY REFLECT THE
CURRENTS THAT WOMEN IN
AFGHANISTAN ARE ENCOUNTERING
TODAY.
>> Brown: A POET HERSELF,
GRISWOLD COLLABORATED WITH
PHOTOGRAER APHND FILMMAKER
SEAMUS MURPHY.
"POETRY" MAGAZINE IS DEVOTING
ITS ENTIRE JUNE ISSUE TO THEIR
WORK.
AND AS PART OF THE PROJECT,
MURPHY HAS MADE A SHORT
DOCUMENTARY FEATURING THE
LANDAYS.
>> I COULD HAVE TASTED DEATH FOR
A TASTE OF YOUR TONGUE, WATCHING
YOU EAT ICE CREAM WHEN WE WERE
YOUNG.
>> Brown: AS WITH POETRY
EVERYWHERE, ONE THEME IS LOVE.
BUT THERE'S A WHOLE LOT MORE.
>> SLIDE YOUR HAND INSIDE MY
BRA.
STROKE A RED AND RIPENING
POMEGRANATE OF KANDAHAR.
>> PULL THAT BURKA BACK, AND SHE
WILL TALK TO YOU ABOUT THE SIZE
OF HER HUSBAND'S MANHOOD.
SHE WILL GO RIGHT FOR IT: SEX,
RAUNCH, KISSING, RAGE.
SHE WILL TALK ABOUT THE RAGE OF
WHAT IT IS TO BE CAST IN THIS
ROLE OF SUBSERVIENT, IN A WAY
THAT'S REALLY STARTLING.
>> Brown: THE RAGE GRISWOLD
SPEAKS OF IS ANOTHER THEME,
AIMED AT THE UNEQUAL AND OFTEN
HARSH TREATMENT OF WOMEN.
>> WHEN SISTERS SIT TOGETHER,
THEY ALWAYS PRAISE THEIR
BROTHERS.
WHEN BROTHERS SIT TOGETHER, THEY
SELL THEIR SISTERS TO OTHERS.
>> Brown: GRISWOLD SAYS LANDAYS
ARE A WAY TO SUBVERT A SOCIAL
CODE IN WHICH MANY RURAL WOMEN
ARE PROHIBITED FROM SPEAKING
FREELY.
>> THEY'RE A WAY TO BE VERY
OUTSPOKEN, BUT NOT TO OWN THE
AUTHORSHIP OF THAT STATEMENT,
BECAUSE, BEING COLLECTIVE AND
ANONYMOUS, SHE CAN SAY, "WELL,
OF COURSE I JUST HEARD THAT ON
THE PHONE, OR I JUST HEARD THAT
IN THE MARKET.
I DIDN'T MAKE THAT UP."
>> Brown: THAT'S IN A SOCIETY
WHERE THEY ARE OTHERWISE NOT
ALLOWED TO SPEAK, NOT ALLOWED TO
WRITE POEMS.
>> AT ALL.
>> Brown: WITH REAL, DANGEROUS
CONSEQUENCES.
>> EXACTLY.
>> Brown: IN FACT, THIS PROJECT
BEGAN AFTER GRISWOLD WROTE A
MAGAZINE ARTICLE ON A YOUNG
WOMAN WHO'D BEEN BEATEN FOR
WRITING POEMS, AND LATER KILLED
HERSELF.
GIVEN STORIES LIKE THAT, IT WAS
ALSO TRICKY TO COLLECT THE
LANDAY.
>> FREQUENTLY, TO MEET THESE
WOMEN, I HAD TO BE UNDERCOVER TO
SOME EXTENT.
I HAD TO WEAR A BURKA, AT THEIR
REQUEST: "PLEASE COME DRESSED AS
ONE OF US."
WE WILL GATHER ON SATURDAY
AFTERNOON.
OUR HUSBANDS WILL BE OUT."
WE STARTED IN REFUGEE CAMPS
AROUND KABUL AND WE WOULD HIT
SITUATIONS LIKE... WELL, FIRST
OF ALL, SEAMUS AND I WERE NEVER
ABLE TO WORK TOGETHER, BECAUSE
IT IS IMPOSSIBLE FOR HIM AS A
MAN TO WITNESS WOMEN SINGING OR
SAYING THESE LANDAY.
>> Brown: THEY JUST WON'T DO IT?
>> THEY WOULD BE KILLED TO BE
FOUND OUT TO DO IT.
>> Brown: ANOTHER MAJOR THEME OF
THE LANDAY IS THE PAIN AND
SORROW OF WAR.
>> IN BATTLE, THERE SHOULD BE
TWO BROTHERS: ONE TO BE
MARTYRED, ONE TO WIND THE SHROUD
OF THE OTHER.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF ANGER AT THE
TALIBAN, A LOT OF RAGE AT THE
HYPOCRISY OF THE TALIBAN, AND AN
EQUAL AMOUNT-- IF NOT MORE--
RAGE AT THE HYPOCRISY OF THE
AMERICANS AND WHAT THEIR
INFLUENCE HAS LEFT BEHIND.
MANY OF THE WOMEN WHO WERE
SHARING THEM WITH US WERE
SURVIVORS OF VERY RECENT BOMBING
ATTACKS.
ONE WOMAN HAD SHARED A LANDAY
ABOUT HER COUSIN, A TALIB, WHO'D
JUST BEEN KILLED BY A DRONE
STRIKE.
>> THE DRONES HAVE COME TO THE
AFGHAN SKY.
THE MOUTHS OF OUR ROCKETS WILL
SOUND IN REPLY.
>> Brown: THE MENTION OF DRONES
IS ALSO AN EXAMPLE OF HOW
LANDAYS RESPOND TO CHANGES IN
SOCIETY.
VERSES THAT ONCE MENTIONED THE
BRITISH NOW SUBSTITUTE
"AMERICANS."
AND TODAY, LANDAYS ARE SHARED ON
THE INTERNET AND IN SOCIAL
MEDIA, AND THOSE NEW
TECHNOLOGIES MAKE THEIR WAY INTO
THE UPDATED LANDAY.
>> HOW MUCH SIMPLER CAN LOVE BE?
LET'S GET ENGAGED NOW.
TEXT ME.
>> Brown: WHAT HAPPENS TO THIS
FORM IN THE FUTURE?
IS IT YOUR SENSE THAT IT MIGHT
DIE OFF BECAUSE OF THE CHANGES?
OR DOES IT HAVE A LIFE?
>> I ASKED ONE OF THE LEADING
NOVELISTS IN AFGHANISTAN,
MUSTAFA SALEK, WHAT HE THOUGHT,
WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO THE LANDAY
NOW THAT THEY TALK ABOUT THE
INTERNET, FACEBOOK, DRONES.
WILL IT KILL THEM?
AND HE SAID JUST THE OPPOSITE.
THEY'RE BEING TRADED AND THEY
ARE CHANGING, BEING REMIXED LIKE
RAP AT RAPID SPEED, AND PEOPLE
LOVE THEM.
THE LANDAY IS SUPPOSED TO
COMMUNICATE IN THE MOST NATURAL
LANGUAGE THE TRUTH OF AFGHAN
LIFE.
SO I FOUND MY ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT
THE DEATH OF THE LANDAY BEING
ABSOLUTELY CONFOUNDED BY WHAT
AFGHANS SAID THEMSELVES.
>> Brown: JUST ANOTHER
ASSUMPTION CONFOUNDED IN THIS
RARE LOOK BEHIND THE VEIL.
FOR THE RECORD, "POETRY"
MAGAZINE, WHICH IS FEATURING THE
LANDAYS THIS MONTH, IS PRODUCED
HELPS SUPPORT OUR COVERAGE.
AND THERE'S MORE ON ALL OF THIS
ONLINE, WHERE PHOTOGRAPHER
SEAMUS MURPHY NARRATES A
SLIDESHOW OF HIS IMAGES FOR THE
PROJECT.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THE TALIBAN ANNOUNCED IT WILL
NEAR KABUL AFGHANISTAN.
THAT WAS REPORTED LATE TODAY BY
CNN AND REUTERS.
THE DEATHS CAME AS AFGHAN FORCES
TOOK OVER CONTROL OF SECURITY
AND AS TALIBAN ANNOUNCED IT WILL
JOIN PEACE TALKS WITH THE U.S.
AND AFGHAN GOVERNMENTS.
AND
LEADERS AT THE G-8 SUMMIT
PRESSED FOR SYRIAN PEACE TALKS,
BUT THEY STOPPED SHORT OF
CALLING FOR THE OUSTER OF
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD.
>> Brown: ALSO ONLINE TODAY, A
RATHER UNUSUAL GROUP PORTRAIT IN
THE MAKING.
HARI SREENIVASAN EXPLAINS.
>> Sreenivasan: ON JULY 19, A
SPACECRAFT, NOW EXPLORING
SATURN, WILL TAKE A PICTURE OF
EARTH FROM A BILLION MILES AWAY.
READ A BLOG FROM ONE OF NASA'S
SCIENTISTS.
AND A REMINDER: JOIN ME FRIDAY
FOR A LIVE STREAM WITH OUR
FAVORITE POLITICAL ANALYSTS,
MARK SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS.
ALSO, CICADAS BUZZING IN
VIRGINIA.
TWEET YOUR QUESTIONS FOR THEM
USING THE HASHTAG
#DOUBLEHEADERLIVE.
DETAILS ARE ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
GWEN?
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, MILES O'BRIEN
LOOKS AT THE INVASION OF ONE OF
NATURE'S MOST FASCINATING AND
DEAFENING SPECTACLES, THE 17-
YEAR CICADAS.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
GOOD NIGHT.